# Nodes

## Multichannel nodes

When passing a value to audio-rate input of a Node, the signal is by default monophonic (single-channel). For example, `SquareOscillator(440)` generates a 1-channel output.

It is possible to generate multi-channel output by passing an array of values in the place of a constant. For example, `SquareOscillator([440, 880])` generates stereo output with a different frequency in the L and R channels. 

There is no limit to the number of channels that can be generated by a node. For example, `SquareOscillator(list(100 + 50 * n for n in range(100)))` will create a node with 100-channel output, each with its own frequency. 

```python
>>> sq = SquareOscillator([100 + 50 * n for n in range(100)])
>>> print(sq.num_output_channels)
100
```

### Automatic upmixing

There are generally multiple inputs connected to a node, which may themselves have differing number of channels. For example, `SquareOscillator(frequency=[100, 200, 300, 400, 500], width=0.7)` has a 5-channel input and a 1-channel input. In cases like this, the output of the nodes with fewer channels is *upmixed* to match the higher-channel inputs.

Upmixing here means simply duplicating the output until it reaches the desired number of channels. In the above case, the `width` input will be upmixed to generate 5 channels, all containing `0.7`.

If `width` were a stereo input with L and R channels, the output would be tiled, alternating between the channels. Each frame of stereo input would then be upmixed to contain `[L, R, L, R, L]`, where `L` and `R` are the samples corresponding to the L and R channels.

The key rule is that, for nodes that support upmixing, the **output signal has as many channels as the input signal with the highest channel count**. 

This process percolates through the signal chain. For example:

```python
SquareOscillator(frequency=SineLFO([1, 3, 5], min=440, max=880),
                 width=SawLFO([0.5, 0.6], min=0.25, max=0.75))
```

- The `min` and `max` inputs of the `frequency` LFO would be upmixed to 3 channels each
- The `min` and `max` inputs of the `width` LFO would be upmixed to 2 channels each
- Then, the output of the `width` node would be upmixed from 2 to 3 channels

### Nodes with fixed input/output channels

Some nodes have immutable numbers of input/output channels. For example:

- `StereoPanner` has 1 input channel and 2 output channels
- `StereoBalance` has 2 input channels and 2 output channels
- `ChannelMixer` has an arbitrary number of input channels, but a fixed, user-specified number of output channels

Even Nodes that do not have an obvious input (e.g. `BufferPlayer`) have input channels, for modulation inputs (for example, modulating the rate of the buffer).

When two nodes are connected together with incompatible channel counts (for example, connecting a `StereoBalance` into a `StereoMixer`), an `InvalidChannelCountException` will be raised.

### The Channel* node classes

There are a number of Node subclasses dedicated to channel handling.

* **ChannelArray**: Concatenates the channels of multiple nodes, so that calling `ChannelMix` with nodes of `N` and `M` channels will produce an output of `N + M` channels.
* **ChannelMixer**: Reduces or expands the number of channels by evenly spreading the audio across the output channels.
* **ChannelSelect**: Selects sub-channels of the input, either individually or by group. 

### Querying channel subsets with the index operator

Single channels of a multi-channel node can be accessed using the index `[]` operator. For example:

```python
square = SquareOscillator([440, 441, 442, 443])
output = square[0]
# output now contains a mono output, with a frequency of 440Hz.
```

Slice syntax can be used to query multiple subchannels:

```python
square = SquareOscillator([440, 441, 442, 880])
output = square[0:2]
# now contains a two-channel square wave
```

---

[→ Next: Status and properties](properties.md)
